DP-18/Add basic troubleshooting section to the docs (#5901)
OpenNMS/opennms: docs/modules/troubleshooting/pages/startup-issues.adoc

[source, shell]
----
opennms[80542]: Starting OpenNMS:
opennms[81178]: runjava: Error: configured JVM not found.
opennms[81178]: runjava: "/usr/lib/jvm/java-11-openjdk-11.0.17.0.8-1.el9_1.x86_64/bin/java" does not exist or is not executab>
opennms[81178]: runjava: Run "/opt/opennms/bin/runjava -s" to set up the java.conf file.
opennms[81178]: runjava:
opennms[81178]: runjava: You can install a JVM by downloading one from Oracle, or by running something like
opennms[81178]: runjava: 'apt-get install openjdk-11-jdk' or 'yum install java-11-openjdk-devel'.
opennms[80542]: OpenNMS was unable to connect to the 'opennms' database configured in opennms-datasources.xml.
opennms[80542]: failed
systemd[1]: opennms.service: Control process exited, code=exited, status=1/FAILURE
----

See xref:deployment:core/system-requirements.adoc[] for software compatibility requirements, including the supported versions of Java.

[[startup-errors]]
== Configuration errors

If you encounter a configuration error when starting {page-component-title}, you should ensure that {page-component-title} is installed and updated to the latest version:

[source, console]
install -dis

> If you run `systemctl start opennms` and {page-component-title} is not installed or up to date, the output displays error messages:

Reviewer: Please use a variable in this command spec, so that it renders as `systemctl stop meridian` when the docs are built as Meridian. I'm in a hurry so apologies for not looking up that variable name.

Reviewer 2: The systemd unit is never `meridian`.  it is always `opennms`.

systemd[1]: opennms.service: Failed with result 'exit-code'.
systemd[1]: Failed to start OpenNMS server.
----

.`.rpmsave` error
[source, shell]
----
opennms[133068]: OPENNMS_HOME (/opt/opennms) directory.
opennms[133068]: The format of the original files may have changed since
opennms[133068]: you modified them before installing a new version.
opennms[133068]: Please double-check that your configuration files are
opennms[133068]: up-to-date and delete any leftover .rpmsave files or
opennms[133068]: OpenNMS will not start.
opennms[132345]: failed
systemd[1]: opennms.service: Control process exited, code=exited, status=1/FAILURE
systemd[1]: opennms.service: Failed with result 'exit-code'.
systemd[1]: Failed to start OpenNMS server.
----

NOTE: You should evaluate the `.rpmnew` or `.rpmsave` file against the original file with the same name to determine which to keep.
Delete the appropriate file, remove the `.rpmnew` or `.rpmsave` file extension (if applicable), and start {page-component-title}.

You can run the following command to identify any `.rpmnew` or `.rpmsave` files in your environment:

[source, shell]

> $ sudo find $OPENNMS_HOME -name *.rpm* -exec ls -la {} \;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
$ sudo find $OPENNMS_HOME -name '*.rpm*' -exec ls -la {} \;
```

opennms[81178]: runjava: Error: configured JVM not found.
opennms[81178]: runjava: "/usr/lib/jvm/java-11-openjdk-11.0.17.0.8-1.el9_1.x86_64/bin/java" does not exist or is not executab>
opennms[81178]: runjava: Run "/opt/opennms/bin/runjava -s" to set up the java.conf file.
opennms[81178]: runjava:
opennms[81178]: runjava: You can install a JVM by downloading one from Oracle, or by running something like
opennms[81178]: runjava: 'apt-get install openjdk-11-jdk' or 'yum install java-11-openjdk-devel'.
opennms[80542]: OpenNMS was unable to connect to the 'opennms' database configured in opennms-datasources.xml.
opennms[80542]: failed
systemd[1]: opennms.service: Control process exited, code=exited, status=1/FAILURE
----

See xref:deployment:core/system-requirements.adoc[] for software compatibility requirements, including the supported versions of Java.

[[startup-errors]]
== Configuration errors

If you encounter a configuration error when starting {page-component-title}, you may need to run the {page-component-title} database installer, which updates the relational database schema to the latest version and applies any required changes to the configuration files:

> [source, console]

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
[source, shell]
```

[source, shell]
runjava -s

If you run `systemctl start opennms` with a version of Java that is not compatible, the output displays error messages:

[source, shell]
----
opennms[80542]: Starting OpenNMS:
opennms[81178]: runjava: Error: configured JVM not found.
opennms[81178]: runjava: "/usr/lib/jvm/java-11-openjdk-11.0.17.0.8-1.el9_1.x86_64/bin/java" does not exist or is not executab>
opennms[81178]: runjava: Run "/opt/opennms/bin/runjava -s" to set up the java.conf file.
opennms[81178]: runjava:
opennms[81178]: runjava: You can install a JVM by downloading one from Oracle, or by running something like
opennms[81178]: runjava: 'apt-get install openjdk-11-jdk' or 'yum install java-11-openjdk-devel'.
opennms[80542]: OpenNMS was unable to connect to the 'opennms' database configured in opennms-datasources.xml.
opennms[80542]: failed
systemd[1]: opennms.service: Control process exited, code=exited, status=1/FAILURE
----

See xref:deployment:core/system-requirements.adoc[] for software compatibility requirements, including the supported versions of Java.

[[startup-errors]]
== Configuration errors

> If you encounter a configuration error when starting {page-component-title}, you may need to run the {page-component-title} database installer, which updates the relational database schema to the latest version and applies any required changes to the configuration files:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If you encounter a configuration error when starting {page-component-title}, you may need to run the {page-component-title} database installer.
This updates the relational database schema to the latest version and applies any required changes to the configuration files:
```

If you run `systemctl start opennms` and {page-component-title} is not installed or up to date, the output displays error messages:

[source, shell]
----
opennms[119337]: /opt/opennms/etc/configured does not exist.
opennms[119337]: You need to run the installer to set up the database.  In most
opennms[119337]: cases, it is enough to run:
opennms[119337]:   /opt/opennms/bin/install -dis
opennms[119337]: For details, see the install guide at:
opennms[119337]: http://www.opennms.org/index.php/QuickStart#Initialize_OpenNMS_and_the_Database
opennms[119134]: failed
systemd[1]: opennms.service: Control process exited, code=exited, status=1/FAILURE
systemd[1]: opennms.service: Failed with result 'exit-code'.
systemd[1]: Failed to start OpenNMS server.
----

NOTE: You can also run `config-tester -a` to verify your configuration settings.
If the tests pass, a success message is displayed.

=== Nonobvious error messages with older Linux distributions

Some older Linux distributions like Red Hat Enterprise Linux 7 and CentOS 7 are a bit more terse when a failure occurs when trying to start the {page-component-title} service and an additional diagnostic step can help reveal the problem.

> After installing the software and running `systemctl start opennms`, the process immediately exits with a brief error message:
> [source, shell]

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
After installing the software and running `systemctl start opennms`, the process immediately exits with a brief error message:

[source, shell]
```

----
# systemctl start opennms
Job for opennms.service failed because the control process exited with error code.
See "systemctl status opennms.service" and "journalctl -xe" for details.
----

> Running `systemctl status opennms` produces the following output:
> [source, shell]

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Running `systemctl status opennms` produces the following output:

[source, shell]
```

----
systemd[1]: Starting OpenNMS server...
systemd[1]: opennms.service: control process exited, code=exited status=1
systemd[1]: Failed to start OpenNMS server.
systemd[1]: Unit opennms.service entered failed state.
systemd[1]: opennms.service failed.
----

> Another way of starting the {page-component-title} verbosely is with the command `$\{OPENNMS_HOME}/bin/opennms -v start` which will give some additional detail:
> [source, shell]

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You can also start the {page-component-title} services verbosely; this provides additional details about any errors:

[source, shell]
```

----
# $\{OPENNMS_HOME}/bin/opennms -v start
WARNING: relaunching as opennms
WARNING: `systemctl` was found, but OpenNMS is not being run in Systemd mode.
You will not be able to use systemctl to manage an OpenNMS started manually from the CLI.
Starting OpenNMS: /opt/opennms/bin/opennms: OpenNMS not configured.
/opt/opennms/etc/configured does not exist.

You need to run the installer to set up the database.  In most
cases, it is enough to run:

  /opt/opennms/bin/install -dis

For details, see the install guide at:

http://www.opennms.org/index.php/QuickStart#Initialize_OpenNMS_and_the_Database

[FAILED]
----

> In the above, `$\{OPENNMS_HOME}/bin/install -dis` had not been run which was causing startup to fail.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In the above example, `$\{OPENNMS_HOME}/bin/install -dis` had not been run, causing startup to fail.
```

opennms[8011]: failed
systemd[1]: opennms.service: Control process exited, code=exited, status=1/FAILURE
systemd[1]: opennms.service: Failed with result 'exit-code'.
systemd[1]: Failed to start OpenNMS server.
----

.`.rpmsave` error
[source, shell]
----
opennms[133068]: WARNING!  You have files that end in .rpmsave in your
opennms[133068]: OPENNMS_HOME (/opt/opennms) directory.
opennms[133068]: The format of the original files may have changed since
opennms[133068]: you modified them before installing a new version.
opennms[133068]: Please double-check that your configuration files are
opennms[133068]: up-to-date and delete any leftover .rpmsave files or
opennms[133068]: OpenNMS will not start.
opennms[132345]: failed
systemd[1]: opennms.service: Control process exited, code=exited, status=1/FAILURE
systemd[1]: opennms.service: Failed with result 'exit-code'.
systemd[1]: Failed to start OpenNMS server.
----

NOTE: You should evaluate the `.rpmnew` or `.rpmsave` file against the original file with the same name to determine which to keep.
Delete the appropriate file, remove the `.rpmnew` or `.rpmsave` file extension (if applicable), and start {page-component-title}.

> You can run the following command to identify any `.rpmnew` or `.rpmsave` files in your environment:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You can run this command to identify any `.rpmnew` or `.rpmsave` files in your environment:
```

This section describes troubleshooting steps for problems encountered while {page-component-title} starts.

[[java-errors]]
== Java errors

If you encounter a Java error when starting {page-component-title}, you should verify that your Java version is compatible:

[source, shell]
runjava -s

If you run `systemctl start opennms` with a version of Java that is not compatible, the output displays error messages:

[source, shell]
----
opennms[80542]: Starting OpenNMS:
opennms[81178]: runjava: Error: configured JVM not found.
opennms[81178]: runjava: "/usr/lib/jvm/java-11-openjdk-11.0.17.0.8-1.el9_1.x86_64/bin/java" does not exist or is not executab>
opennms[81178]: runjava: Run "/opt/opennms/bin/runjava -s" to set up the java.conf file.
opennms[81178]: runjava:
opennms[81178]: runjava: You can install a JVM by downloading one from Oracle, or by running something like
opennms[81178]: runjava: 'apt-get install openjdk-11-jdk' or 'yum install java-11-openjdk-devel'.
opennms[80542]: OpenNMS was unable to connect to the 'opennms' database configured in opennms-datasources.xml.
opennms[80542]: failed
systemd[1]: opennms.service: Control process exited, code=exited, status=1/FAILURE
----

> See xref:deployment:core/system-requirements.adoc[] for software compatibility requirements, including supported Java versions

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
See xref:deployment:core/system-requirements.adoc[] for software compatibility requirements, including supported Java versions.
```

This updates the relational database schema to the latest version and applies any required changes to the configuration files:

[source, shell]
install -dis

NOTE: Running or re-running the database installer is generally safe, provided you stop {page-component-title} first.

If you run `systemctl start opennms` and {page-component-title} is not installed or up to date, the output displays error messages:

[source, shell]
----
opennms[119337]: /opt/opennms/etc/configured does not exist.
opennms[119337]: You need to run the installer to set up the database.  In most
opennms[119337]: cases, it is enough to run:
opennms[119337]:   /opt/opennms/bin/install -dis
opennms[119337]: For details, see the install guide at:
opennms[119337]: http://www.opennms.org/index.php/QuickStart#Initialize_OpenNMS_and_the_Database
opennms[119134]: failed
systemd[1]: opennms.service: Control process exited, code=exited, status=1/FAILURE
systemd[1]: opennms.service: Failed with result 'exit-code'.
systemd[1]: Failed to start OpenNMS server.
----

NOTE: You can also run `config-tester -a` to verify your configuration settings.
If the tests pass, a success message is displayed.

> === Nonobvious error messages with older Linux distributions

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
=== Non-obvious error messages with older Linux distributions
```
